# ECHR Lindholm vs. Denmark

## THE FACTS

6.  L had been a Jehovah’s Witness since he was fifteen years old. In 1970 he married his wife, the first applicant, who was also a Jehovah’s Witness. They had five children.

7.  On 19 September 2014, in the afternoon, L, aged 67, was admitted to the emergency unit of a local hospital (Odense Universitetshospital, medicinsk afdeling Ærø) having fallen about two metres through a roof. The medical records showed that he was admitted at 3.28 p.m. and was then conscious. The first applicant estimated that L might have been lying unconscious for up to an hour before he was found. He was transported by helicopter from the local hospital to the main hospital, it was noted in the medical records at 10.22 p.m. that on his arrival at the hospital L had been awake and could give his name but that he was disoriented and had no recollection of the fall. All information came from the first applicant. A CT scan was carried out and showed a small subarachnoid haemorrhage (bleeding between the membranes that surround the brain) and bleeding on the left side of the thorax (chest) and on the left side of the gluteal muscles (buttock muscles).

8.  Prior to his hospital admission, L had been taking blood thinners in the form of warfarin (Marevan 2.5mg) on prescription to reduce the risk of cerebral thrombosis from atrial fibrillation. One of the known side effects of warfarin is that it generally increases a patient’s tendency to bleed. Any bumps, blows or jolts to the body will therefore have a risk of increased bleeding.

9.  During the night of 19 - 20 September 2014, L began to have difficulty breathing. A new CT scan revealed that a massive accumulation of blood had developed by his left lung. A drain was inserted into the lung late in the morning of 20 September 2014. L’s medical records show that his condition at that time did not indicate a need for a blood transfusion.

10.  An entry in L’s medical records on 20 September 2014 at 9.05 a.m. stated that L was able to give his name and date of birth and that he understood that he was in hospital, but that he otherwise seemed disoriented.

11.  According to entries in the medical records made on 20 September 2014 at 2.08 p.m. and 2.38 p.m., L’s daughter had informed the healthcare staff that L, as a Jehovah’s Witness, did not wish to receive a blood transfusion. In the afternoon of the same day, the healthcare staff were presented with an advance medical directive and a Health Care Power of Attorney (forhåndsdirektiv og fuldmagt angående lægebehandling), which were entered into L’s medical records. L had been carrying the document on his person when the accident happened. The advance medical directive had been signed by L on 11 February 2012 and stated as follows (emphasis in the original):

“I, L ... am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and I direct that NO TRANSFUSIONS of whole blood, red cells, white cells, platelets, or plasma be given me under any circumstances, even if healthcare providers believe that they are necessary to preserve my life. I refuse to pre-donate and store my blood for later infusion.”

12.  According to the medical records, a doctor was called at 4.33 p.m. because L had lost consciousness. L was transferred to the hospital’s neurosurgical intensive care unit and a new CT scan was carried out.

13.  At 6.15 p.m. a note was added that L’s haemoglobin level (blood cell count) had dropped from 10.0 to 6.1. and that “[t]he patient may not be given blood products because of his religious beliefs”.

14.  A further note at 7.40 p.m. recorded that “the patient is still not fully conscious”.

15.  From the medical records of 20 September 2014 at 11.42 p.m. it appeared that the unit’s healthcare staff had had a conversation with L’s family (the first applicant and some of the children). The family repeated that L was a Jehovah’s Witness and did not wish to receive any transfusions of blood or blood components. The healthcare staff informed them that L was being treated in accordance with their wishes, but that he was in a very serious condition because of the atrial fibrillation, the blood accumulation near his lungs, and the added strain on his circulation. The family understood the gravity of his condition.

16.  In the afternoon of 21 September 2014, L was transferred to the intensive care unit because the condition of his lungs was very poor. [...]

19.  On 22 September 2014, the chief physician, X, consulted the medical health officer (ombudslægen) regarding L’s immediate need for treatment. His decreasing haemoglobin level, the swelling in his brain and the subarachnoid haemorrhage made it necessary to increase his haemoglobin to a level between 4.3 and 4.5. L was unconscious and unable to give consent. In an e-mail send at 12.19 p.m., the medical health officer gave the following reply:

“... Advice given:

The chief physician, X, was reminded (guidet) of sections 19 and 24 of the Health Act (sundhedsloven)

[a]s the patient is not competent and has not expressed his wishes in the current situation (but did so in 2012 in another context), there may be a need to give blood according to section 19 (if, however, there may be any possible way to avoid giving him blood, this should be sought in the light of the hospital’s knowledge of the patient). For the sake of the patient, his relatives and the staff (including a potential subsequent complaint), it is important that record keeping is done with great care and conscientiousness.”

20.  According to the medical records of 22 September 2014 at 2.20 p.m., L’s haemoglobin level had dropped to 3.4, and increasing intracranial pressure (elevated pressure in the brain) had been observed.

21.  The healthcare staff discussed the situation with L’s family again and explained the risk of suboptimal brain perfusion (marginally reduced oxygenation and a reduction in the supply of blood to the brain) and an increased risk of bleeding in the brain. The family maintained that L did not wish to receive a blood transfusion.

22.  On 22 September 2014 at 3.28 p.m., the chief physician X decided to increase the haemoglobin level to between 4.3 and 4.5 by administering a blood transfusion. L was given one bag of blood which was prescribed on 22 September 2014 at 4.44 p.m. His haemoglobin level rose to 4.5.

23.  Seven days later, L showed no signs of returning to consciousness, for which there was no neurosurgical explanation.

24.  On 9 October 2014, L was transferred to the intensive care unit at another hospital (Svendborg Hospital).

25.  On 20 October 2014, the healthcare staff had a conversation with L’s wife and daughter about L’s condition and explained that permanent damage seemed unavoidable. In consultation with the family, active treatment was discontinued later that day, after which L received only palliative care.

26.  L died on 21 October 2014. It is not in dispute that the cause of death was not linked to the blood transfusion administered on 22 September 2014 (see paragraph 22 above).

32. By a judgment of 7 December 2020, the High Court [of Denmark] found partly for the applicants. The majority (two out of three judges) found, on the one hand, that previous information, such as an advance medical directive, could not be conclusive when doctors had to decide whether a blood transfusion was required under section 19 of the Health Act (see paragraph 39 below). On the other hand, making an unconditional, formal requirement of informed refusal “in the current course of illness” a condition for not administering a blood transfusion would mean that a person who was hospitalised in an unconscious state could not object to the treatment, no matter how unambiguous and well-documented their previous refusal of blood might be. Moreover, in the present case, the doctors had had no doubt about L’s absolute refusal of blood transfusion. Accordingly, there had been a violation of Articles 8 and 9 of the Convention. The wording of the reasoning was as follows:

32. [...] The wording of the reasoning was as follows:

> “All the essential evidence in the case – in particular L’s advance directive of 11 February 2012, his refusal of a possible blood transfusion during his hospitalisation in 2010, the available medical records, the statements given by [the first applicant and her daughter] and the statement by chief physician X – points unequivocally to the fact that L’s refusal to receive blood was a personal, religious decision. In particular, it is noted that at no time during the hospitalisation or afterwards has there been any doubt at all that the advance directive was completed and signed by L of his own free will on 11 February 2012, and that he was at that time capable of acting rationally. It must also be stressed that L decided to renew his advance directive after his hospitalisation in 2010. This is information which was essentially available when chief physician X decided that a blood transfusion should be carried out. He has explained, among other things, that he “at no time [doubted] the family’s statements about the patient’s wishes, but he had to do the right thing and follow the medical rules.”

> There was therefore no doubt about L’s decision, apart from the – in the light of the other evidence – theoretical doubt connected with the fact that L was unconscious when it first appeared advisable to carry out a blood transfusion, and that the doctors were therefore unable at that time to follow the procedure laid down in section 24, subsection 2 of the Health Act. Moreover, L was not found to have had an opportunity to make it known at the time of his admission, when he was still conscious, that he did not want blood. We note here that he was at that point dazed [omtåget] and suffering from amnesia, that it does not appear that he was questioned by the health professionals, and that he was carrying the advance directive on his person, which in itself indicates that he stood by his decision to refuse blood.

> After an overall assessment of the information available, we therefore find that at the time of the decision to give blood to L there was no reasonably justified doubt that he did not wish to receive blood even in the current situation of illness. There is no evidence of such special circumstances that chief physician ... otherwise had grounds for disregarding the wish.

> In these circumstances, we consider that it has been established that the decision to allow blood transfusion on 22 September 2014 was not necessary for reasons of critical social need, see Article 8, paragraph 2, and Article 9, paragraph 2, of the European Convention on Human Rights.”

33.  On appeal, in a judgment of 1 February 2022 a seven-judge panel of the Supreme Court (Højesteret) unanimously found against the applicants for the following reasons:

[...]

> Under Article 8, paragraph 1, of the Convention on Human Rights, everyone has the right to private life, and according to paragraph 2 there can be interference with this right only where it is necessary for the protection of the health or of the rights of others etc. Article 9, paragraph 1 establishes that everyone has the right to freedom of religion and to manifest his religion, and under Article 9, paragraph 2 this freedom can only be subject to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of for example health or for the protection of the rights and freedom of others. Article 14 of the Convention contains a prohibition on discrimination on the grounds of, inter alia, religion.

> In its judgment of 10 June 2019 in case 302/02 (Jehovah ‘s Witnesses of Moscow and Others v. Russia), the Court found that the Russian authorities had violated the Convention on Human Rights by dissolving the association the Jehovah’s Witnesses of Moscow and banning the association’s activities, inter alia, with reference to the association’s encouragement of its members to refuse certain forms of medical treatment, such as blood transfusions. The judgment states that refusing potentially life-saving medical treatment on religious grounds is a problem of considerable legal complexity, involving a conflict between, on the one hand, the State’s interest in protecting the lives and health of its citizens and, on the other, the individual’s right to personal autonomy in the sphere of physical integrity and religious beliefs, cf. paragraph 134. Furthermore, it is stated that the genuineness of a patient’s refusal of medical treatment constitutes “a legitimate concern”, given that health and possibly life itself are at stake in such situations, see paragraph 138.

> The Supreme Court thirdly finds that the judgment does not provide a basis for holding that the national legislature is precluded from establishing, as part of a combined balancing of different considerations, further conditions under which directives from members of Jehovah’s Witnesses refusing blood transfusions would be binding on health personnel.

> The requirement in section 24, subsection 2 of the Health Act that a refusal of blood transfusions must be given in the context of a current course of illness in order to be binding on health staff is further supported in a reply from the Minister of Health at the time, during Parliament’s consideration of the bill about the corresponding rule in section 15 of the previous Patients’ Legal Status Act (the Minister of Health’s reply to question number 4 of 2 April 1998 from the Parliament’s Health Committee, Bill no. L 15 annex 25). It is stated in the reply that an advance medical directive setting out that the patient – who by then is unconscious or otherwise incapable – refuses treatment that involves blood transfusion is not binding on the physician, but shall obviously be taken seriously and be included in the considerations to be taken into account when deciding on treatment. In that connection, it is mentioned that both the Council of Europe’s Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine and a number of other declarations only make it obligatory to take advance directives into consideration, and do not require that they are binding on treating staff. It is then stated in the reply that whether the issue is a refusal of blood transfusions or directions about psychiatric treatment or other medical intervention, introducing rules that advance directives shall be binding on treating personnel, including in situations where the patient’s situation is not hopeless, would give rise to serious concerns about patient safety and would involve immeasurable problems with the documentation needed in order to reasonably determine that those were indeed the patient’s settled wishes. Furthermore, the Minister said in his reply that it could not be ruled out that in the current situation the patient, had he or she been conscious, would have preferred to go on living.

> The present position is that an advance directive refusing blood transfusions or other medical treatment has a persuasive influence but is not binding if it is a matter of life-saving treatment of for example an unconscious patient. The requirement in section 24, subsection 2 of the Health Act that a refusal of a blood transfusion must be made in the context of the current course of illness in order to be binding on health staff is, as described, there to enable the balancing of personal autonomy, patient safety, and the documentation of a patient’s settled wishes. The legislature has found it proper to have a regulation that can prevent the risk that for example an unconscious patient dies because of insufficient vital treatment which, in the context of the current course of illness, he or she would have consented to.

> During the first days after L’s admission to hospital, he was treated with, inter alia, blood-forming medication in order to take into account his previous directives about not wanting a blood transfusion. It was not until it was thought to be required for his survival that a blood transfusion was given. Against that background, the Supreme Court finds that there are no grounds for determining that the blood transfusion that was given to L on the basis of the provisions of section 24 of the Health Act in conjunction with section 19 was a violation of Articles 8 or 9 of the Convention on Human Rights.

> As stated, section 19 of the Health Act allows life-saving treatment to be administered to an unconscious patient regardless of any advance directive from him or her about not wanting to be treated. The rule is general and is not restricted to blood transfusions. Therefore, the blood transfusion that was given to L was not a violation of Article 14 of the Convention on Human Rights, read in conjunction with Articles 8 and 9.


## THE LAW

ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLES 8 and 9 OF THE CONVENTION
55.  The applicants complained that the Supreme Court judgment of 1 February 2022 (see paragraph 33 above), approving the lawfulness of administering the blood transfusion to L despite his previously expressed refusal of this form of treatment, was in violation of Articles 8 and 9 of the Convention, which in so far as relevant provide as follows:

Article 8

“1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private ... life... 2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.”

Article 9

“1.  Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief, in worship, teaching, practice and observance.  Freedom to manifest one’s religion or beliefs shall be subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of public safety, for the protection of public order, health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.”

65.  As to the proportionality test, the first applicant submitted that given the fundamental importance of respecting patient autonomy and personal integrity, any margin of appreciation for the domestic authorities in this respect would have to be very narrow. Moreover, referring to, among other things, the Oviedo Convention, and the Court’s finding in Jehovah’s Witnesses of Moscow and Others v. Russia (no. 302/02, §§ 135, 136, 139 and 142, 10 June 2010), the interference had not been necessary in a democratic society. The State’s interest in the preservation of life or health under Article 2 of the Convention must yield to the patient’s Article 8 right to personal integrity and autonomy, unless there is sufficient evidence to prove that the patient’s will was “overborne” or was the product of “improper pressure or influence”. In the present case, referring particularly to the conclusion of the High Court in its judgment of 7 December 2020 (see paragraph 32 above), there was no doubt about the genuineness of L’s refusal of blood transfusions. It was clear on the facts of the case that there had been no reason whatsoever to doubt the validity of L’s refusal of blood transfusions. There was therefore nothing in the facts of the case that could be taken as revealing a pressing social need or as constituting a relevant and sufficient reason for interfering with his right to respect for his private life.

66.  The Government submitted that that there had been no violation of the provisions relied on. The interference had been “in accordance with the law”, had “a legitimate aim” and “was necessary in a democratic society”.

67.  The Danish legislation was founded on the fundamental principle of self-determination based on informed consent in the context of current medical treatment, only yielding for situations, such as that in the present case, where a refusal of potentially life-saving treatment could not be immediately obtained due to the patient’s condition.

68.  The Danish legislation only gave binding effect to a so-called “advance directive on medical treatment” or “living will” (behandlingstestamenter) in which a terminally ill patient wanted to decline life-prolonging treatment.

69.  Other advance medical directives, for example about not wishing to receive blood transfusions or psychiatric treatment, had no binding effect under Danish law, but had to be included in decisions on medical treatment.

70.  In 1998, and again in 2005, when the provisions from the Patients’ Rights Act were repeated in the Health Act (see paragraph 34 above), the Danish legislature had properly balanced the State’s interest in protecting the lives and health of its citizens against the individual’s right to personal autonomy in the sphere of physical integrity and religious beliefs. It took account of the Convention and the Oviedo Convention, and the legislature had given reasons for not making advance medical directives binding, including that it would give rise to serious concerns about patient safety and would entail unmanageable issues with the documentation needed to determine that the advance directive did indeed represent what the patient wanted. Furthermore, it could not be ruled out that in a given situation a patient, had he or she been conscious, would have preferred to go on living. The Government referred, among other things, to the Supreme Court judgment of 1 February 2022 (see paragraph 33 above), and the written reply of 21 April 1998 from the former Minister of Health to Parliament about advance medical directives (see paragraph 49 above).

81.  The Court is satisfied, having regard to the wording of sections 19, 20 and 24 of the Health Act, and the preparatory notes, that the interference, in the form of administering a blood transfusion, was clearly defined in the law and fulfilled the requirements of accessibility and foreseeability, and that there are no elements indicating that the Supreme Court interpreted and applied domestic law in an arbitrary or manifestly unreasonable way.

(ii)   Aim of the interference

82.  The first applicant argued that both the blood transfusion administered to L without his consent and the Supreme Court’s judgment had failed to pursue any of the aims recognised in Article 8 § 2, including “the lives and health of ... citizens” since there was no reasonably justified doubt that L had unconditionally rejected blood transfusion (see paragraph 64 above).

83.  The Government argued that the legal aim was the State’s interest in protecting the life and health of its citizens.

84.  The Court accepts the Government’s position on this point. It observes that the exception in domestic law for emergencies corresponds very closely in substance to the Oviedo Convention, read in light of the explanatory report (see also to similar effect paragraph 7.4 of Resolution 1859(2012) of the Parliamentary Assembly, and the World Medical Association’s Declaration of Lisbon). All of these texts share the concern that vital medical treatment must be permitted in emergency situations, in order to save the lives of patients when their own wishes cannot be sufficiently established. Furthermore, the State’s duty under Articles 2 and 8 to ensure the protection of hospital patients must also be borne in mind in this connection. It can therefore be said that the interference had as its aim “the protection of health” (see Pindo Mulla, cited above, §§ 135-36).

(iii)  Necessity of the interference

(α)    Non-binding effect of advance medical directives

85.  The Court recently examined the issue of the “previously expressed wishes of the patient” in the light of the Convention, the Oviedo Convention, and a comparative survey undertaken for the purpose of the case in Pindo Mulla (cited above, §§ 151-53). The survey showed a diversity of practice in Europe when it came to the way the right to life and the right to respect for the autonomy of the patient were reconciled by taking account of the patient’s previously expressed views.

86.  The Court pointed out that both the principle of giving binding legal effect to advance directives and the formal and practical way of doing so come within the margin of appreciation of the Contracting States (ibid., §§ 153 and 156). In other words, the Member States are under no obligation under Article 8 of the Convention to give binding effect to advance directives, for example that signed by L on 11 February 2012 (see paragraph 11 above).

‒   The legislative and policy framework

87.  As pointed out by the Supreme Court and the Government (see paragraphs 33 and 70 above), when the Danish legislature adopted the Patients’ Rights Act in 1998, the former section 15 (now section 24 of the Health Act) was inserted specifically to accommodate the wishes of Jehovah’s Witnesses, who do not, for religious reasons, wish to receive blood or blood products during surgery or other procedures. The provision reflected that the importance of the integrity and right to autonomy of the individual was considered more important than the preservation of life (see paragraph 47 above). It was however made conditional on the patient’s refusal of blood or blood products being given in the context of his or her current course of illness and being based on information provided by the healthcare professional about the consequences to the patient’s health of not administering blood or blood products as part of the treatment (see the current section 24, subsection 2 of the Health Act, cited in paragraph 46 above). During Parliament’s reading of Bill no. L 15 of 26 March 1998 on the Legal Rights of Patients, the former Minister of Health was asked by a member of Parliament to comment on a letter from the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, which recommended that medical directives be binding on healthcare staff. The Minister’s written reply of 21 April 1998 emphasised that the legislature did not want to give binding effect to advance medical directives, since it would “give rise to serious concerns about patient safety and would entail unmanageable issues with the documentation needed to determine that the advance directive does in fact represent the patient’s settled wishes. Furthermore, it cannot be ruled out that the patient, had he or she been conscious, would have preferred at that point to go on living, or that new treatment methods developed after the advance directive could have so improved the patient’s life that the patient would have accepted the treatment” (see paragraph 49 above).

88.  The legislation was re-assessed in 2005 (see paragraph 34 above). The legislature took account of the Convention and the Oviedo Convention (which had been in force since 1 December 1999) and decided to repeat the provisions from the Patients’ Rights Act in the Health Act.

89.  As described above the requirement under Section 24, subsection 2, of the Health act that a patient’s refusal of blood products is only binding if given in the course of the patient’s current illness and based on information provided by health care professionals on the consequences of this refusal aims to ensure that the patient’s decision is current and informed and that an unconscious patient, who might want to live, is not denied lifesaving treatment. The Court finds that this requirement falls within the State’s margin of appreciation when balancing the State’s duty to protect life and the patient’s right to autonomy.

‒   L’s individual case

90.  As already stated, (see paragraph 75 above), following the accident on 19 September 2014, L was unable to state his own wishes “in the context of his current course of illness”.

91.  The fact that during his fall and admission to hospital L carried on his person his advance medical directive of 11 February 2012, stating that he refused blood transfusions (see paragraph 11 above), did not meet the requirement in section 24, subsection 2 of the Health Act that a refusal of a blood transfusion must be given on an informed basis and in connection with the current course of illness (see paragraphs 33 and 46 above).

92.  The question remains whether the advance medical directive was treated as relevant and taken into account in the health staff’s treatment decisions as required by section 20 of the Health Act (see paragraph 41 above).

93.  In this respect the Supreme Court gave weight to the fact that “during the first days after L’s admission to hospital, he was treated with, inter alia, blood-forming medication in order to take into account his previous directives about not wanting a blood transfusion. It was not until it was thought to be required for his survival that a blood transfusion was given” (see paragraph 33 above).

94.  The Court finds no reason to question that finding. It further notes the entry in L’s medical records on 20 September 2014 at 6.15 p.m. (see paragraph 13 above) that L’s haemoglobin level had dropped from 10.0 to 6.1 and that “the patient may not be given blood products because of his religious beliefs”.

95.  On 21 September 2014 at 5.45 p.m. L’s haemoglobin level had dropped to 4.2 (see paragraph 16 above).

96.  On 22 September 2014, L’s haemoglobin level had dropped to 3.7 at around noon (see paragraph 18 above) and to 3.4 at 2.20 p.m. (see paragraph 20 above).

97.  On 22 September 2014 the doctor treating L sought guidance from the medical health officer and was informed that there might be a need to give blood to save L’s life but that if there were any possible way to avoid giving him blood, this should be sought in the light of the hospital’s knowledge of the patient. The Court does not question that the doctors treating L acted in accordance with this guidance and sought to avoid giving blood until it was found necessary for L’s survival.

98.  In addition, every day from 20 to 22 September 2014 the healthcare staff met with the first applicant and some of her and L’s children (see paragraphs 15, 17 and 21 above) and took note of L’s expressed wishes, including those expressed in his advance medical directive. In keeping with that, the healthcare personnel tried to avoid allowing L’s haemoglobin level to fall to a life-threatening level by using inter alia blood-forming medication (see paragraph 33 above).

99.  It was not until 3.28 p.m. on 22 September 2014 that the healthcare staff found it necessary to administer a blood transfusion in order to save L’s life (see paragraph 22 above).

Overall conclusion
100.  In the light of all the above-mentioned considerations, the Court considers that the reasons relied upon by the Supreme Court in its judgment of 1 February 2022 (see paragraph 33 above) were both relevant and sufficient to establish that the interference complained about can be regarded as having been “necessary in a democratic society” and proportionate to the aims pursued, namely the protection of health, and that the authorities of the respondent State acted within their margin of appreciation, having taken into account the criteria set out in the Court’s case‑law, notably Pindo Mulla (cited above, §§ 146-53).

101.  It therefore follows that there has been no violation of Article 8 of the Convention read in the light of Article 9.
